Add `minishell` assignment statement (#111)
open-education-hub/operating-systems: assignments/minishell/README.md

### Running an application

Suppose you have an executable named `sum` in the current directory that takes as many numbers as arguments and sums them, printing the result at `stdout`.
The following example shows how the minishell implemented by you should behave.

```sh
> ./sum 2 4 1
7
```

If the executable is located at the `/home/student/sum` absolute path, the following example should also be valid.

```sh
> /home/student/sum 2 4 1
7
```

Each application will run in a separate child process of the minishell created using [fork](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fork.2.html).

### Operators

#### Sequential operator

Using the `;` operator you can chain multiple commands that will run sequentially, one after another.
In the command `expr1; expr2` it is guaranteed that `expr1` evaluation will finish before `expr2` will be evaluated.

```sh
> echo "Hello"; echo "world!"; echo "Bye!"
Hello
world!
Bye!
```

#### Parallel operator

Using the `&` operator you can chain multiple commands that will run in parallel.
When running the command `expr1 & expr2`, the evaluation for both expressions start at the same time, and it is not guaranteed to finish in a specific order.

```sh

> > echo "Hello" & echo "world!" & echo "Bye!"
> world!
> Hello
> Bye!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> echo "Hello" & echo "world!" & echo "Bye!"  # The words may be printed in any order
world!
Bye!
Hello
```

```

#### Pipe operator

> Using the `|` operator you can chain multiple commands that will pass the output of the previous command as the input for the current command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the `|` operator you can chain multiple commands so that the standard output of the first command is redirected to the standard input of the second command.
```

Hint: Look into [anonymous pipes](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/pipe.2.html) and file descriptor inheritance while using [fork](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fork.2.html).

```sh
> echo "Bye"                      # command outputs "Bye"
Bye
> ./reverse_input
Hello                             # command reads input "Hello"
olleH                             # outputs the reversed string "olleH"
> echo "world" | ./reverse_input  # the output generated by the echo command will be used as input for the reverse_input executable
dlrow
```

> #### Conditional execution chain operators

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Chain Operators for Conditional Execution
```

> Using the `&&` operator you can chain multiple commands, but the chain execution will stop when it encounters the first command that exists with an error (return code not 0).
> The commands are run sequentially from left to right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `&&` operator allows chaining commands that are executed sequentially, from left to right.
The chain of execution stops when it encounters the first command **that exists with an error (return code not 0)**.
```

```sh
# throw_error always exits with a return code different than 0 and outputs to stderr "ERROR: I always fail"
> echo "H" && echo "e" && echo "l" && ./throw_error && echo "l" && echo "o"
H
e
l
ERROR: I always fail
```

> Using the `||` operator you can chain multiple commands, but the chain execution will stop when it encounters the first command that exits successfully (return code 0).
> The commands are run sequentially from left to right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `||` operator allows chaining commands that are executed sequentially, from left to right.
The chain of execution stops when it encounters the first command **that exists successfully (return code is 0)**.
```

```sh
# throw_error always exits with a return code different than 0 and outputs to stderr "ERROR: I always fail"
> ./throw_error || ./throw_error || echo "Hello" || echo "world!" || echo "Bye!"
ERROR: I always fail
ERROR: I always fail
Hello
```

#### Operator priority

> The priority of the available operators is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The priority of the available operators is the following.
The lower the number, the **higher** the priority:
```

> pwd
/home/student/operating-systems/assignments/minishell
> cd inexitent
no such file or directory
> cd /usr/lib
> pwd
/usr/lib
```

### Closing the shell

Inputting either `quit` or `exit` should close the minishell.

### Running an application

Suppose you have an executable named `sum` in the current directory.
It takes arbitrarily many numbers as arguments and prints their sum to `stdout`.
The following example shows how the minishell implemented by you should behave.

```sh
> ./sum 2 4 1
7
```

If the executable is located at the `/home/student/sum` absolute path, the following example should also be valid.

```sh
> /home/student/sum 2 4 1
7
```

Each application will run in a separate child process of the minishell created using [fork](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fork.2.html).

### Environment variables

Your shell will support using environment variables.
The environment variables will be initially inherited from the `bash` process that started your minishell application.

If an undefined variable is used, its value is the empty string: `""`.

> **_NOTE:_** The following example contains comments which won't need to be supported in the minishell implementation.

> > They are present here only to give a better understanding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> They are present here only to give a better understanding of the minishell's functionalities.
```

Bash is both an interactive command language and a scripting language.
It is used to interact with the file system, applications, operating system and more.

For this assignment you will build a Bash-like shell with minimal functionalities like traversing the file system, running applications, redirecting their output or piping the output from one application into the input of another.
The details of the functionalities that must be implemented will be further explained.

## Shell Functionalities

### Changing the Current Directory

The shell will support a built-in command for navigating the file system, called `cd`.
To implement this feature you will need to store the current directory path because the user can provide either relative or absolute paths as arguments to the `cd` command.

The built-in `pwd` command will show the current directory path.

Follow the following examples below to understand these functionalities.

```sh
> pwd
/home/student
> cd operating-systems/assignments/minishell
> pwd
/home/student/operating-systems/assignments/minishell
> cd inexitent
no such file or directory
> cd /usr/lib
> pwd
/usr/lib
```

> > **_NOTE:_** Using the `cd` command without any arguments or with more than one argument doesn't affect the current directory path.

Author: I have added these features a bonuses.

### Closing the Shell

Inputting either `quit` or `exit` should close the minishell.

### Running an Application

Suppose you have an executable named `sum` in the current directory.
It takes arbitrarily many numbers as arguments and prints their sum to `stdout`.
The following example shows how the minishell implemented by you should behave.

```sh
> ./sum 2 4 1
7
```

If the executable is located at the `/home/student/sum` absolute path, the following example should also be valid.

```sh
> /home/student/sum 2 4 1
7
```

Each application will run in a separate child process of the minishell created using [fork](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fork.2.html).

### Environment Variables

Your shell will support using environment variables.
The environment variables will be initially inherited from the `bash` process that started your minishell application.

If an undefined variable is used, its value is the empty string: `""`.

> **_NOTE:_** The following examples contain comments which don't need to be supported by the minishell.
> They are present here only to give a better understanding of the minishell's functionalities.

```sh

> > NAME="John Doe"                    # Will assign "John Doe" to NAME variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> NAME="John Doe"                    # Will assign the value "John Doe" to the NAME variable
```

> > AGE=27                             # Will assign 27 to AGE variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> AGE=27                             # Will assign the value 27 to the AGE variable
```

> ./identify $NAME $LOCATION $AGE    # Will translate to ./identify "John Doe" "" 27 because $LOCATION is not defined
```

A variable can be assigned to another variable.

```sh
> OLD_NAME=$NAME    # Will assign the value of the NAME variable to OLD_NAME
```

> 

Reviewer: After we review the skeleton and solution, we need to specify if variables may be reassigned or not and how to handle this case.

When running the command `expr1 & expr2`, both expressions are evaluated at the same time (by different processes).
The order in which the two commands finish is not guaranteed.

```sh
> echo "Hello" & echo "world!" & echo "Bye!"  # The words may be printed in any order
world!
Bye!
Hello
```

#### Pipe Operator

With the `|` operator you can chain multiple commands so that the standard output of the first command is redirected to the standard input of the second command.

Hint: Look into [anonymous pipes](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/pipe.2.html) and file descriptor inheritance while using [fork](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fork.2.html).

```sh
> echo "Bye"                      # command outputs "Bye"
Bye
> ./reverse_input
Hello                             # command reads input "Hello"
olleH                             # outputs the reversed string "olleH"
> echo "world" | ./reverse_input  # the output generated by the echo command will be used as input for the reverse_input executable
dlrow
```

#### Chain Operators for Conditional Execution

The `&&` operator allows chaining commands that are executed sequentially, from left to right.

> The chain of execution stops when it encounters the first command **that exists with an error (return code not 0)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exists with an error (return code not 0)**.
```

I know it was me who made this suggestion a few days ago, but now I've found a better wording.

> The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exists with an error (return code not 0)**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exits with an error (return code not 0)**.
```

```sh
# throw_error always exits with a return code different than 0 and outputs to stderr "ERROR: I always fail"
> echo "H" && echo "e" && echo "l" && ./throw_error && echo "l" && echo "o"
H
e
l
ERROR: I always fail
```

The `||` operator allows chaining commands that are executed sequentially, from left to right.

> The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exists successfully (return code is 0)**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exits successfully (return code is 0)**.
```

> The chain of execution stops when it encounters the first command **that exists successfully (return code is 0)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The chain of execution stops at the first command **that exists successfully (return code is 0)**.
```

```sh
# throw_error always exits with a return code different than 0 and outputs to stderr "ERROR: I always fail"
> ./throw_error || ./throw_error || echo "Hello" || echo "world!" || echo "Bye!"
ERROR: I always fail
ERROR: I always fail
Hello
```

#### Operator Priority

The priority of the available operators is the following.
The lower the number, the **higher** the priority:

1. Pipe operator (`|`)
1. Conditional execution operators (`&&` or `||`)
1. Parallel operator (`&`)
1. Sequential operator (`;`)

### I/O Redirection

The shell must support the following redirection options:

- `< filename` - redirects `filename` to standard input
- `> filename` - redirects standard output to `filename`
- `2> filename` - redirects standard error to `filename`
- `&> filename` - redirects standard output and standard error to `filename`
- `>> filename` - redirects standard output to `filename` in append mode
- `2>> filename` - redirects standard error to `filename` in append mode

Hint: Look into [open](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/open.2.html), [dup2](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/dup.2.html) and [close](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/close.2.html).

> ## Testing and Grading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Testing
```
Grading is something internal. Other students might not be graded.

# Minishell

## Objectives

- Learn how shells create new child processes and connect the I/O to the terminal.

> - Gain a better understanding of the `fork` function wrapper.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Gain a better understanding of the `fork()` function wrapper.
```

> - Learn to correctly parse commands written by the user and treat errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Learn to correctly execute commands written by the user and treat errors.
```
We provide the parser, so students don't have to deal with it.
